Hello friends
In this video let us have an introduction to dynamic
programming.
So what is dynamic programming? Dynamic programming is one best
method to solve the optimisation problems in linear time.
Let us see how to solve a problem in dynamic
programming.
First the problem will be divided into multiple sub problems
Secondly solve the sub problems and store the result and
finally using the result of sub problems, solve another big
sub problem and continuously follow this approach to solve
The large problem.
There are two kinds of approach in dynamic programming
First is bottom up approach and the second one is
top down approach.
Let us understand them one by one. In the bottom
up approach, the base solution will be taken first.
From the bottom,
The problem will be solved step by step like this.
Finally we will have the result of big problem.
In the top down approach,
The main problem is recursively broken down into
multiple sub problems.
The breakdown will happen until the base case is reached.
And then from there, the solution will be computed like
this
Let us understand it using the nth Fibonacci example
here the problem statement is given n and we need to return
the nth Fibonacci number from the series. The fibonacci Series is
Fibonacci of 0 is 0, Fibonacci of 1 is 1
Fibonaaci of 2 is sum of fib(0) and fib(1)
that is 0+1 equal to one
Fibonaaci of 3 is sum of fib(1) and fib(2)
which is 1+1 equal to 2
And like this, in general,
Fibonacci(N) = Fibonacci(N-1) + Fibonacci(N-2).
Let us find the 4th Fibonacci number
using the bottom up approach and top down approach
Let us see the bottom up approach first
As we have discussed in the bottom up approach, we
solved the problem
Step by step from the base case
Here
What is the base case? Fibonacci of zero is zero
and Fibonacci of One  is one.
So write 0 in Fib(0) & 1 in Fib(1).
Let us solve one by one
What will be  Fib(2)? It is Fib(0) + Fib(1)
That is the sum of previous two Fibonacci numbers
So fib(2) equal to 0+1 that is 1.
Now we have solved one sub problem that is fib(2). Using this,
Let us solve the next sub problem
Fib(3)
It will be the sum of fib(1) and fib(2)
that is 1+1 which is 2
now we have solved another sub problem.  Let's again
use
This result to compute the next problem's result
So Fib(4) will be the sum of fib(2)
and fib(3)
So 1+2 which is what? Three.
Now we have found the forth fibonacci number which
is three.
This is how in bottom up approach we solve a
big problem step by step from the base case.
In each step, we solve one sub problem
And using that solution, we will solve the next sub
problem in the next step.
Let us understand how it is solved in the top
down approach.
The general formula to find nth Fibonacci number is
Fib(N-1) + Fib(N-2).
So to find Fib(4) the top-down approach will call
Fib(4-1) that is 3 and Fib(4-2) that is 2.
Similarly Fib(3) will call Fib(3-1)
that is fib(2) and fib(3-2) that is fib(1) and
this fib(2) again calls fib(1) and fib(0)
Since fib(0) and fib(1) are base
cases the recursive calls will be stopped here and the
right side fib(2) will again call fib(1) and fib(0)
All the recursive calls are now made.
Now the result will be calculated like this
As we know fib(0) and fib(1) is 1
So fib(2) will be 0+1, 1.
So 1 will be returned to fib(2)
Here Fib(1)
is one and we have already calculated fib(2)
which is 1. So 1+1, 2 will be returned to
Fib(3)
Here again fib(0) and fib(1) will
be calculated
That is 0+1 which is 1 and it
will be returned to fib(2)
Now we have fib(3) which is 2 and
fib(2) which is 1. So 2+1, 3
will be returned to fib(4). So fib(4) is 3
So this is how in the top down approach,
the nth Fibonacci number will be found
recursively. This approach is completely different from the
bottom up approach. In bottom up approach, from base case
we solved the large problem step by step in top down
The large problem is broken down recursively till
the base case.
And from there, the solution will be computed.
If we observe the top down approach solution, we can
see that we have solved the sub problem fib(2) twice
But in the bottom up approach, we have solved each
sub problem exactly once. To avoid this kind of
recomputing the same sub problem. In top down approach
We should keep additional memory to store the results of
already solved sub problems
This is also called memoization.
In the next video we will understand how to use
memoization to solve the problems effectively in the top down approach